When I was 21 I went to visit my bebe – my grandmother – for a month during the school holidays. I was excited about experiencing rural village life in Tanzania; it was strange and different for me after growing up in the city of Mwanza. I enjoyed it, but somehow it made me sad. It was the first time I’d seen my bebe since I was small. My father grew up in the village but came to the city when he was young to find a job. We didn’t have enough time or money to go and see her. I was sick for a couple of days soon after I reached the village. We were drinking water straight from the river or the well. It wasn’t even boiled. But I felt even more pain for my bebe and her community. These communities can ​be lifted ​out of poverty because entrepreneurial young people ​can start successful businesses I talked to some families who lived near her house about washing their hands, wearing shoes, eating a balanced diet instead of just always eating banana stew. Where my bebe lives they grow bananas, so it was bananas for breakfast, lunch and dinner. Every day. I remember my bebe came out of the toilet and asked me to pour water so that she could wash her hands. She wanted to do it properly, and was asking me how. She wanted to learn so she could keep her good health. I felt I was making a difference and wanted to carry on, but it was a big task on my own. Raleigh ICS was my opportunity to make an impact on a bigger scale – to help these Tanzanian communities escape the poverty and hardship of their lives. I have since been volunteering on a Livelihoods programme, teaching entrepreneurship. Maswisa is similar to my bebe’s village. Life is simple; the whole village eats bananas for breakfast, lunch and dinner. They survive by running small businesses. There are also 14 British and Tanzanian young people living in homestays in this rural village, in southern Tanzania, for three months at a time. We have taught people to explore their business ideas and research the market to make sure they have a niche – so many were starting businesses without looking at the market to make sure their idea was viable. We are also improving hygiene and sanitation by installing taps so people can wash their hands. This village is gaining many things. Where I have stayed they have learned to wash their hands before each and every thing they do. I think in time it will be possible to lift these communities out of poverty because many of the young people now have sufficient knowledge of entrepreneurship to start successful businesses. Young people are energetic and capable of creating amazing change. My bebe is in my mind always. She is always excited to learn new things. I think I will tell her what I have learnt about sack gardens, a little garden in a sack to grow vegetables and greens so she doesn’t always eat bananas. The day I made a difference is the Guardian Voluntary Sector Network’s series that showcases the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story to share about a landmark moment in your life, email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com with a short summary of your experience. Talk to us on Twitter via @Gdnvoluntary and join our community for your free Guardian Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to you on the first Thursday of the month.   